Welcome to The Deep Dive. Today, we're tackling something pretty ambitious.
We're basically laying out a blueprint step-by-step for building a zero-cost, open-source,
crypto trading bot.
Yeah, and not just any bot. The real goal here isn't just following price trends.
We're aiming for something more institutional-grade.
Using a large language model, an LLM, to actually pull alpha,
real trading edge from unstructured stuff.
Right, like news headlines, maybe social media posts, that kind of thing.
Exactly. It's a big shift, really, moving from just pure math on price and volume
to these hybrid systems. But getting that LLM properly integrated,
turning words into trades, well, that needs a really solid architecture,
and when you can actually test.
Okay, let's unpack the architecture then, because the sources we looked at laid out to,
well, pretty different approaches. There's this pattern B command and control.
Sounds kind of straightforward.
It is on the surface. Pattern B, you might see it with something like
coming bot's MCP server. It basically uses the LLM like a manager you can talk to.
So you tell in plain English, do this strategy, if that happens.
Pretty much. It's good for managing operations, making things efficient.
But, and this is the key thing, the LLM isn't creating the trading signal itself.
It's just executing predefined rules.
Ah, okay. And the sources strongly preferred pattern A, the integrated AI co-processor,
especially for finding new strategies. Why is that one better
if generating signals is the goal?
It all comes down to back testing. Pattern A treats the LLM differently.
It's like an internal engine that engineers features.
It takes raw text, say, a news headline, and its job is to output a number,
a structured and numerical signal like a sentiment score from minus one to plus one.
And because that output is a number tied to a specific time.
Exactly. It becomes a historical data series,
just like price data or volume or, you know, RSI.
And you can rigorously back test that specific signal against past price movements.
With pattern B, the LLM's decision making isn't easily isolated and tested historically.
So pattern A is really the only way if you're serious about quantitative validation.
Can't skip the back test.
That rigor definitely points towards needing the right engine.
Which is why free trade came out as the recommended choice, isn't it?
Over other options.
Precisely. Free trade is, well, it's built for this kind of directional
signal driven strategy.
It's back testing tools or top notch.
Things like hyper opt for optimization or built-in.
But the clincher is really free KI.
It's a specific module designed to just seamlessly slot in machine learning predictions,
like our LLM sentiment score right into the strategy's data.
Treats it like any other technical indicator.
OK, engine sorted, free trade.
But the intelligence, the LLM, we need that brain to be zero cost.
We can't be paying for some massive API, right?
No, absolutely not.
The zero recurring cost mandate means self-hosting.
Running the LLM on your own machine.
And the trick here is not to aim for some giant general-purpose model.
You focus on smaller specialized models, SLMs, small language models.
Smaller house models.
We're talking maybe the 7 to 8 billion prime of the range.
Models specifically trained on financial text,
like the Phinei's Phino18B is a good example.
They're much more efficient for this task.
Right, it's specialized.
And what kind of hardware are you looking at to run something like that locally?
The key spec is VRAM, the memory on your graphics card.
You'd probably want around, say, 24 gigabytes
for smooth operation with a model that size.
And to make setting it up less painful,
you use tools like Alama and Docker.
They basically package the LLM up and expose it
as a simple API on your local network.
Turns your local LLM into a callable brain.
Got it.
So local brain is running ready via an API.
The main strategy then is this LLM-powered sentiment analysis.
How does that work day-to-day?
It starts with the prompt.
You'd have to be really specific with what you asked the LLM.
You send it the news text, but you engineer the prompt to say something like,
return only a score between more of it at 1.0 and plus 1.0 representing the sentiment.
Nothing else.
Just the number.
Then, because individual scores can be noisy,
you'd typically aggregate them.
Maybe calculate a rolling average over the last few hours or days.
That smooth score becomes your actual signal.
You then combine that with maybe a simple technical indicator,
like is the price above its moving average for your actual buy or sell rules.
Makes sense.
And the data, market data is easy.
Free APIs from exchanges like Binance or Kraken.
But the news, how do you get that for free reliably?
Yeah, good question.
You can use ethical web scraping,
but honestly, a really robust and often easier way is using RSS feeds.
Lots of reputable financial news sites like CoinDesk for crypto still offer RSS feeds
that gives you a clean structured stream of headlines and articles for free.
Okay, strategy defined, data flowing.
Now the most critical part you mentioned, validation with free trade.
What are the absolute must-do's?
Number one, without question, is avoiding look ahead by us.
This is the classic mistake.
You absolutely cannot let your back tests use information
that wouldn't have been available at that point in time.
Seems obvious, but it's easy to mess up.
Using tomorrow's news to make today's trade in the simulation.
Exactly.
Fatal flaw.
And second, you must account for real-world costs.
Training fees and slippage.
Slippage is that difference between the price you thought you'd get
and the price the order actually filled that.
Ignoring those makes back tests results look way better than reality.
Free trade helps model this.
Right, so let's recap the winning stack here.
It's Pattern A, the integrated AI co-processor architecture.
Using free trade as the engine because of free AI and its back testing,
powering it with a self-hosted specialized financial SLM,
like an 8 billion parameter model,
all validated rigorously,
avoiding look ahead and accounting for costs.
That's the blueprint.
It's achievable, open source, and zero cost,
but requires that disciplined, quantitative approach.
And looking ahead, what's the next step beyond text?
Well, the really interesting edge research is moving
into multimodal models.
Think things like Finnauave.
These models can process more than just text.
Imagine feeding the AI images of price charts directly,
so it could identify complex chart patterns visually.
Wow, so it could see a pattern
and read the new sentiment at the same time.
Exactly.
Combining visual pattern recognition from charts
with textual sentiment analysis from news.
That simultaneous analysis of different data types,
that's likely where the next level of alpha generation
is heading, a much richer signal.
Fascinating. Combining chart reading with news analysis.
Automatically, that's definitely something to think about.